Tom h add auto scavenge tutorial (#823)
EventStore/documentation: docs/tutorials/Auto-Scavenge.md

---
title: Auto-Scavenge
order: 7
---

## Tutorial: Using Auto-Scavenge

> This step-by-step tutorial guides you through using, scheduling and managing  **Auto-Scavenge** in EventStoreDB.

Reviewer: Is Auto-Scavenge a proprietary feature? If yes, I suggest that we always use it with capitals for consistency. If not, I suggest changing to "Auto-scavenge".

Reviewer 2: It's a fair question.  It's proprietary because it's only available with an enterprise license and was built explicitly by Kurrent engineers for KurrentDB.  But I don't believe us to be the only platform that provides an "auto-scavenge" (I could be wrong).  I was following the convention within the docs on this topic - but this is an area we should include when we ultimately develop a style guide.  
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dfa0ee48-0bce-4c23-a76c-c57615685714)

Author: It is good to check with me, because I am not always consistent. 
However for this topic I tried to match what had come before me, as far as that is possible. 

Here is a summary of what I saw, and I tried to use that as the basis for what I wrote. 

I don't know how to view my original branch, I deleted it locally and this one has been modified a few times. 

Trust me, I gave it some thought, and either went with what I saw, or seeing no consistency I mirrored that behavior. 

I think my styling of Auto-Scavenge, or auto-scavenge was based on what I saw on this docs page. 

https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/operations/auto-scavenge.html

The title is "Auto-Scavenge"
The directory it is in is (based on top of page breadcrumbs "Auto scavenge"
In text body vs title "Auto-scavenge" is used
The configuration setting is "AutoScavenge"
The http endpoint is "auto-scavenge" 
When used to describe the behavior of the http request process initiated "auto-scavenge" is used

More generally this page: 
https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/operations/backup.html#restore-1
uses "auto-scavenge" to both describe the feature, and the http call. 
5 occurrences of "auto-scavenge" no other capitalization. 

This page, refers to the feature as
https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/quick-start/upgrade-guide.html#upgrading-from-24-10-preview1
"Auto-scavenge"

This page refers to the feature as
"Auto-Scavenge" 
https://docs.kurrent.io/server/

While 
"Auto-scavenging" is
used here https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/operations/auto-scavenge.html

> The Auto-scavenge feature is designed to manage and automate cluster scavenges across multiple nodes efficiently. It operates on a scheduled basis using CRON expressions, ensuring that only one node scavenge occurs simultaneously to minimize disruption. The feature prioritizes non-leader nodes for scavenging, with the leader node resigning before its own scavenge is executed to reduce impact on cluster performance.

Reviewer: Example of where we can use consistency with Auto-Scavenge vs. Auto-scavenge

Author: To be clear. 
My original pull request used the following, CONSISTENTLY. 

"Auto-Scavenge" was used once, for the title of the tutorial.
"Auto-scavenge" was used thereafter when describing the feature. 
When describing a 

Any inconsistencies were introduced in later edits to the branch. Mark Morrisey most likely. 

@coloradomorrissey , please be consistent. 

When describing an http endpoint, or a configuration setting I used the literal case used in the setting.

> The Auto-scavenge feature is designed to manage and automate cluster scavenges across multiple nodes efficiently. It operates on a scheduled basis using CRON expressions, ensuring that only one node scavenge occurs simultaneously to minimize disruption. The feature prioritizes non-leader nodes for scavenging, with the leader node resigning before its own scavenge is executed to reduce impact on cluster performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Auto-scavenge feature is designed to manage and automate cluster scavenges across multiple nodes efficiently. It operates on a scheduled basis using CRON expressions, ensuring that only one node scavenge occurs simultaneously to minimize disruption. To reduce impact on cluster performance the feature prioritizes non-leader nodes for scavenging, with the leader node resigning before its own scavenge is executed.
```

Changing the order to ensure clarity

> Auto-scavenge also handles restarting or cancelling scavenges in case of node loss and allows for pausing and resuming of cluster scavenges as needed, providing a comprehensive and automated approach to maintaining cluster health and performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auto-scavenge restarts or cancels scavenges if a node is lost, and allows you to pause and resume cluster scavenges as needed. With this comprehensive, automated approach, you can maintain cluster health and performance more effectively.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Prerequisites:

> * [EventStoreDB 24.10 LTS installed and running](http://@server/quick-start/installation.md)

Reviewer 2: 24.10 is EventStoreDB.  25.0 starts use of KurrentDB.

* [License key](http://@server/quick-start/installation.md#license-keys) for Auto-Scavenge (a valid license is required to use this feature)

> * Requires $ops or $admin role

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Requires `$ops` or `$admin` role
```

### Step 1: Verify license key

> Ensure you have a valid **license key** to utilize Auto-Scavenge. Without the license, this feature will not function.

Reviewer: Do we have a dedicated official name for these features? Something like "enterprise feature" ? 

Additionally, how does the user verify a license key?

Reviewer 2: Mainly referred to as "License Key". https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/quick-start/installation.html#license-keys

Author: Describing how to verify a license key should be a feature of another tutorial. 
A pre-requisite. 
That said, I link to the same page that other tutorials describing features that require a license key point to.
https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/quick-start/installation.html#license-keys

### Step 2: Confirm Auto-Scavenge availability

By default, Auto-scavenge is bundled with EventStoreDB 24.10 LTS. You can confirm its availability in the EventStoreDB logs. Look for the following log message:

```
[INF] "AutoScavenge" "24.10.1" plugin enabled.
```

For instructions on accessing EventStoreDB logs, refer to the [log documentation](http://@server/diagnostics/logs.md).

> If you do not see the "plugin enabled" entry in the log, check the configuration

Reviewer: How does the user check this configuration file? Where is it located? Do we have a dedicated page for it? How do you modify this file?

Author: Once again, this is a tutorial on running aUTo-sCAVenge. 

If a tutorial is needed on configuration in general then we should add it, as a separate tutorial. 

That said, these are not my words, Mark added those. 

He can comment on them. 

Mark thought it was important to add the log pointers. I tend to think that the tutorial should be focussed on the topic in the title. 

If however there is a dependency, that can be explained in an 8 word sentence it is okay to include it. 
If the dependency however requires more explanation than a short sentence, then the tutorial should provide a pointer to the dependency. In this case "how to read a log" how to configure the server in general", "how to verify license"  I considered to be topics that would make this tutorial less clear. 

A single line for the config parameter, I considered to be needed, because once they figure out how to find the configuration, that would be what they searched for. Meaning this provided the details for this feature, that they would cross reference when checking with the other feature, in this case, configuration settings. 

(by the way, configuration is through a file, followed by environment, followed by command line options"

My approach was to focus on the topic AUTO-scavenge, with the following assumptions. 

If they have a license and have not modified the configuration then the steps I proved will suffice. 

If they fail at the license issue the pointer to the docs should suffice. 

In a majority of instances, the feature should not require a reading of the logs. 

That said, logs are written to stdout when the server starts, there is an http endpoint to request them.

 file to see if it has been disabled.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

I assume this is a yaml config file

AutoScavenge:
  Enabled: false
```

If Auto-scavenge has been disabled, enable it and restart the cluster.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

Reviewer 2: @tomthetrainer commit or resolve, please.

AutoScavenge:
  Enabled: true
```

::: note 

> Auto-scavenge cannot be enabled at the same time as dev mode or mem-db

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot enable Auto-Scavenge while `dev mode` or `mem-db` is active.
```

:::

### Step 3: Schedule Auto-Scavenging

> To schedule Auto-scavenge use the http endpoint `/auto-scavenge/configure` and post a JSON object containing a schedule key with a value in Linux crontab format. 
> 
> See [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) for an explanation of the format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To schedule Auto-scavenge use the http endpoint `/auto-scavenge/configure` and post a JSON object containing a schedule key with a value in Linux crontab format. 

See [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) for an explanation of the format.
```

I suggest removing the link to wikipedia and instead provide the format on the doc instead. If that's not possible, link to another reputable source, like IBM docs.

Author: The doc does provide a format. 

"schedule": "0 3 * * *"

The thing about crontab is that you either think and breathe it, and schedule your alarm to get out of bed using crontab, or you don't know anything about it. 

I looked at a few docs, and found that the wikipedia doc was best. 

There is a chance that in later edits to this branch my original was altered, to be clear, I had this. 

Which fits the definition of 

what my original content said of.

"post a JSON object containing a schedule key with a value in Linux crontab format."

```
POST https://127.0.0.1:2113/auto-scavenge/configure
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Basic admin:changeit

   {
    "schedule": "0 3 * * *"
    }
```

> #### Example: Configure to scavenge at 03:00 every day

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: Configuring to scavenge at 03:00 every day

Submit a POST request to the `auto-scavenge/configure` endpoint to schedule a scavenge at 03:00 every day.
```

Reviewer: Do we have an API reference that we can link to? If yes, we should put it here so the user can know what's the expected request body.

Author: I included a request body. 

```
POST https://127.0.0.1:2113/auto-scavenge/configure
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Basic admin:changeit

   {
    "schedule": "0 3 * * *"
    }
```

https://www.linode.com/docs/guides/http-get-request/#http-post-request-examples

HTTP request, plain text protocal.

First line is in the format
(Request type) space (protocal)// (server)/(resource_requested)?(query string)
All following lines are optional headers in the format of Key: Value
<BLANK LINE>
If there is content after a blank line that is the request body

As to wether or not there is a complete http api doc, I don't know. 
If you end up looking into that, I generated some docs on my own at some point from some swagger yaml file. That file although incomplete is or at lease was a better example of what was available. It is probably missing these admin type functions though.

```

> POST https://127.0.0.1:2113/auto-scavenge/configure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST https://<your-server-url>/auto-scavenge/configure
```

Author: I am on the fence about this one. 

127..0.0.1 would be the url used to test the feature. 

So first run by most users might be to 127.0.0.1

I can go either way.

Content-Type: application/json

> Authorization: Basic admin:changeit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authorization: Basic <admin:changeit>
```

Author: On the fence here, 
Many users will try these feature against localhost, assuming the license process allows it. 
Either way works for me.

Reviewer 2: @tomthetrainer commit or resolve, please.  Pick which makes the most sense and lets move on.

   {
    "schedule": "0 3 * * *"
    }
```

> Replace admin:changeit with your credentials, and the url with the correct address for your server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<admin:changeit>` with your credentials, and `<your-server-url>` with the correct address for your server.
```

If you execute this change, replicate it everywhere that uses those values

### Step 4: Checking Auto-Scavenge status

> A `GET` request to the http endpoint `/auto-scavenge/status` will return Auto-scavenge status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Submit a `GET` request to the http endpoint `/auto-scavenge/status` to return the Auto-scavenge status:
```

```

> GET https://127.0.0.1:2113/auto-scavenge/status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET https://127.0.0.1:2113/auto-scavenge/status
```

I suggest changing the examples to use curl, as a well established http client.

Author: I disagree with the widespread use of cURL. 

For my classes I use httpyac, which takes the actual text of an http request and just sends it. So the process is, 
File with http requests, httpyac sends each request and displays what is returned. 

Why I struggle with cURL for docs or demonstration is that it's configuration is command line options, -H for header, -? to post a file. So for training purposes I stick with a text based representation of the request. 

This doc takes the same approach. 
https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/operations/auto-scavenge.html#http-endpoints

Look at the example of using cURL to post an event from our http api docs. 

https://docs.kurrent.io/http-api/v24.10/api.html#append-to-a-stream

```
# You can also use wget
curl -X POST https://eventstore.com/streams/{stream} \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'ES-ExpectedVersion: 0' \
  -H 'ES-EventType: string' \
  -H 'ES-EventId: 0' \
  -H 'ES-RequiresMaster: true'
```

And compare that to the actual http request as used by something like httpyac. 

```
POST http://localhost:2113/streams/newstream
Content-Type: application/vnd.eventstore.events+json

[
  {
    "eventId": "fbf4a1a3-b4a3-3dfe-a01f-ec52c34e19e9",
    "eventType": "event-type",
    "data": {
      "a": "1"
    }
  }
]
```

cURL is widely used, but it is not the best tool for demonstration.

Authorization: Basic admin:changeit
```

The response below shows that Auto-scavenge has been scheduled and will begin running in 13 hours, 14 minutes and 32.6999115 seconds.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```

{
  "state": "Waiting",
   "schedule": "0 3 * * *",
   "timeUntilNextCycle": "0.13:14:32.6299115"
}
```

See the [Auto-Scavenge documentation](https://docs.kurrent.io/server/v24.10/operations/auto-scavenge.html#http-endpoints) for more information on Auto-scavenge states.

### Step 5 (optional): Pausing Auto-Scavenge

> If the status endpoint returns "state": "InProgress" and you want to pause Auto-Scavenge, submit a POST request to the `/auto-scavenge/pause` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the status endpoint returns `"state": "InProgress"` and you want to pause Auto-Scavenge, submit a POST request to the `/auto-scavenge/pause` endpoint:
```

```
POST https://127.0.0.1:2113/auto-scavenge/pause
Authorization: Basic admin:changeit

```

### Step 6 (optional): Resume Auto-Scavenge

> If the status endpoint returns "state": "Paused" and you want to resume Auto-Scavenge, submit a POST request to the `/auto-scavenge/resume` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the status endpoint returns `"state": "Paused"` and you want to resume Auto-Scavenge, submit a POST request to the `/auto-scavenge/resume` endpoint:
```
